Celltype report: Add introduction, sessioninfo, and include child celltype_qc (#539)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf: templates/qc_report/celltypes_supplemental_report.rmd

      strip.background = element_rect(fill = "transparent")
    )
)

> is_supplemental <- TRUE # used for certain text rendering logic

Reviewer: Why do you need this in here?

Author: This is used to _not_ print the sentence "please look at supplemental report for more". I'll revisit this implementation as needed as I incorporate other organizational reviews!

    # only keep legends that match `keep_legend_name`
    show_heatmap_legend = row_title == keep_legend_name,
  )

  return(heat)
}

#' Function to plot a vertically-stacked ComplexHeatmap from a list of matrices
#'
#' @param matrix_list List of matrices to plot in a vertical layout.

> #' @param column_title Title to use for columns, shared among all heatmaps

Reviewer 2: If periods, may as well catch them all.
```suggestion
#' @param column_title Title to use for columns, shared among all heatmaps.
```

Author: > If periods, may as well catch them all.

*Gotta catch em all

Author: noting i went the other way and removed periods here https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/539/commits/14509fc263b040b37c2ff2d59115996d513f30e1

has_cellassign <- "cellassign" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods
has_submitter <- "submitter" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods

# what celltypes are available?
available_celltypes <- c(
  ifelse(has_submitter, "Submitter", NA),
  ifelse(has_singler, "SingleR", NA),
  ifelse(has_cellassign, "CellAssign", NA)
) |>
  na.omit()
```

```{r, results='asis'}
methods_bullets <- available_celltypes |>
  # full string for printing out
  stringr::str_replace("Submitter", "Submitter-provided") |>
  # backticks to only these two methods
  stringr::str_replace_all("(SingleR|CellAssign)", "`\\1`") |>
  # make it bullets
  stringr::str_replace_all("^", "- ") |>
  glue::glue_collapse(sep = "\n")

> glue::glue("

Reviewer: I have mixed feelings about this. I love a pretty blue message, but this is duplicate information to the bullets that are included in "Cell type annotation summary" in the main `celltype_qc.rmd`. I don't know if we need both? And if the placement is what we want?

Author: All points taken :) 

I'm going to keep, but move/tweal it, for now, and let's see how it looks after some rearrangement!

Author: tweal?! no. tweak.

has_cellassign <- "cellassign" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods
has_submitter <- "submitter" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods

# Create data frame of cell types
celltype_df <- create_celltype_df(processed_sce)

> 

Author: Noting that this is deleted since `celltype_df` is defined and inherited from `celltypes_qc.rmd` now instead.

  na.omit()
```

```{r, results='asis'}
methods_bullets <- available_celltypes |>
  # full string for printing out
  stringr::str_replace("Submitter", "Submitter-provided") |>
  # backticks to only these two methods
  stringr::str_replace_all("(SingleR|CellAssign)", "`\\1`") |>
  # make it bullets
  stringr::str_replace_all("^", "- ") |>

>   glue::glue_collapse(sep = "\n")

Author: fyi this also exists but I didn't think we needed another dependency! https://github.com/kiernann/gluedown
so this fyi is mostly because i liked discovering this package.

glue::glue("

>   <div class=\"alert alert-warning\">

Author: Looks like I did this in between you leaving your comment and publishing the review! FYI - https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/539/commits/607f344c6f22c2c1efb1561993a9cedf1039df3e

has_cellassign <- "cellassign" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods
has_submitter <- "submitter" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods

# what celltypes are available?
available_celltypes <- c(
  ifelse(has_submitter, "Submitter", NA),
  ifelse(has_singler, "SingleR", NA),
  ifelse(has_cellassign, "CellAssign", NA)
) |>
  na.omit()
```

> 

Reviewer: If you fully separate out the intro from `celltype_qc.rmd`, then I would add in the `celltype_introduction.rmd` as a child report here, before you get to the supplemental text.

> This report contains summarized results from performing cell type annotation for library `r library_id`.
> The role of this report is to provide more detailed information about cell type annotation results, including the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The role of this report is to provide more detailed information about cell type annotation results, including the following:
```
I think if you move the main intro to above this you can remove that sentence.

has_cellassign <- "cellassign" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods
has_submitter <- "submitter" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods

# what celltypes are available?
available_celltypes <- c(
  ifelse(has_submitter, "Submitter", NA),
  ifelse(has_singler, "SingleR", NA),
  ifelse(has_cellassign, "CellAssign", NA)
) |>
  na.omit()
```

> This report contains summarized results from performing cell type annotation for library `r library_id`.

Reviewer 2: Removing a double "performing" in quick succession.
```suggestion
This report contains a summary of cell type annotation results for library `r library_id`.
```

> The role of this report is to provide more detailed information about cell type annotation results.

Reviewer 2: I don't love this, but something about the why here. 
```suggestion
The goal of this report is to provide more information about these annotation results for initial evaluation of their reliability.
```

> Performing cell type annotation is an inherently challenging task with high levels of uncertainty.

Reviewer 2: I want to emphasize the automated nature of our annotations.
```suggestion
Performing cell type annotation is an inherently challenging task with high levels of uncertainty, especially when using automated annotation methods.
```

> One way to address this is to perform multiple cell type annotation approaches and compare the results, which is what we have done here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One way to address this is to perform multiple cell type annotation approaches and compare the results, as we begin to do below.
```

When multiple methods annotate a given cell as the same or similar cell type, this may indicate that the annotation is more reliable.

Note that the contents of this report will vary based on which cell type annotations are present.
Further, be aware that different cell type annotation methods may assign different labels to the same or similar cell type (e.g., the different string representations `B cell naive` and `Naive B cell`), due to use of different underlying reference datasets.

<!--Note that the specific contents of this report will depend on which cell type annotations are present.-->

> This library contains the following cell types:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This library contains the following cell type annotations:
```

> This library contains the following cell types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This library contains cell types annotated using the following method(s):
```
Something like this? Either way, these are methods not cell types.

```{r results='asis'}
# build up this string as we go:
methods_text <- ""

if (has_submitter) {
  methods_text <- glue::glue(
    "{methods_text}

>     * Submitter-provided cell type annotations were generated by the original lab which produced this data.\n"

Reviewer 2: With the introductory line above, the wording here seems a bit verbose, so I'm making these into sentence fragments.
```suggestion
    * Submitter-provided cell type annotation, generated by the original lab which produced this data.\n"
```

  )
}

if (has_singler) {
  
  methods_text <- glue::glue(
    "{methods_text}

>     * Cell types were annotated using [`SingleR`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SingleR.html), which uses a reference-based approach ([Looney _et al._ 2019](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * [`SingleR`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SingleR.html) annotation, a reference-based approach ([Looney _et al._ 2019](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y)).
```

>     The `{metadata(processed_sce)$singler_reference}` reference dataset, obtained from the [`celldex` package](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/celldex.html), was used for cell typing.\n\n"

Reviewer 2: I think we want fewer newlines (or at least a consistent number). 

I think we may not need any `\n` (I think there is enough whitespace with a normal bulleted list), but we need at most one, as the appending with `glue` adds the second one by virtue of the line break you have there. 

```suggestion
    The `{metadata(processed_sce)$singler_reference} dataset, obtained from the [`celldex` package](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/celldex.html), was used for reference annotations.\n"
```

    )
}

if (has_cellassign) {

>   # TODO: UPDATE THIS STRING WRANGLING WHEN NAMING CHANGES???

Reviewer: We should just make sure to note this on the issue we have for updating the reference files.

Author: Yep, I plan to file an issue once this goes in so I can directly permalink this code!

  tissue_type <- stringr::word(
    metadata(processed_sce)$cellassign_reference,
    -1,
    sep = "-"
  )
  
  methods_text <- glue::glue(
    "{methods_text}

>     * Cell types were annotated using [`CellAssign`](https://github.com/Irrationone/cellassign), which uses a marker-gene based approach ([Zhang _et al._ 2019](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1)).

Reviewer 2: Not sure about the double hyphen here... 
```suggestion
    * [`CellAssign`](https://github.com/Irrationone/cellassign) annotation, a marker-gene-based approach ([Zhang _et al._ 2019](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1)).
```

has_cellassign <- "cellassign" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods
has_submitter <- "submitter" %in% metadata(processed_sce)$celltype_methods

# what celltypes are available?
available_celltypes <- c(
  ifelse(has_submitter, "Submitter", NA),
  ifelse(has_singler, "SingleR", NA),
  ifelse(has_cellassign, "CellAssign", NA)
) |>
  na.omit()
```

This report contains summarized results from performing cell type annotation for library `r library_id`.

> The role of this report is to provide more detailed information about cell type annotation results, including the following:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how I feel about this bulleted list overall (I could see just deleting it). I'm probably okay with it, but I would move it to below the paragraph below.

Author: My sense from previous was we actively _wanted_ something like this in the report, as a guide to explain why emphasize what we do to help folks interpret the report.

So, I like your next suggestion to keep the bullets but make them more general, which also keeps things more extensible in the future.

Reviewer 2: I think my thought is that the paragraph that begins "Performing cell type annotation is an inherently challenging task with high levels of uncertainty." provides this context on its own, and that the bullets are a bit redundant/heavy-handed.

- How do results from different cell type annotation methods compare to one another?

> - How do submitter-provided cell type annotations, if available, compare to results from `SingleR` and/or `CellAssign`?
> - How reliable are `SingleR` and/or `CellAssign` cell type annotations?

Reviewer 2: If keeping the bullets, I think we can make them a bit more general.
```suggestion
- How do submitter-provided cell type annotations, if available, compare to results from automated cell type annotation methods based on reference data or marker genes?
- How reliable are these automated annotation methods?
```

Note that the specific contents of this report will depend on which cell type annotations are present.

> One reason that ScPCA employs multiple cell type annotation approaches is to offer a chance to compare their annotations.
> Performing cell type annotation is an inherently challenging task with high levels of uncertainty.
> 
> Therefore, when multiple methods annotate a given cell as the same or similar cell type, this qualitatively indicates that the annotation is more reliable.

Reviewer 2: I rearranged this a bit, and combined into a single paragraph.

```suggestion
Performing cell type annotation is an inherently challenging task with high levels of uncertainty.
One way to address this is to perform multiple cell type annotation approaches and compare the results, which is what we have done here.
When multiple methods annotate a given cell as the same or similar cell type, this may indicate that the annotation is more reliable.
```

Reviewer: +1 for this suggestion, I like it a lot.

Be aware that different cell type annotation methods may assign different labels to the same or similar cell type (e.g., the different string representations `B cell naive` and `Naive B cell`), due to use of different underlying reference datasets.

> This report first recapitulates the cell type section from the main QC report and then performs further comparisons across cell type annotations.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this sentence is needed.

<!-------------------------- Submitter heatmaps ------------------------------->
```{r, eval = has_submitter & (has_cellassign | has_singler)}
# don't compare submitter to submitter
available_celltypes <- available_celltypes[!(available_celltypes == "Submitter")]

methods_string <- available_celltypes |>
  stringr::str_replace_all("^", "`") |>
  stringr::str_replace_all("$", "`") |>

>   stringr::str_c(collapse = " and ")

Reviewer 2: Magically, this will do the right thing even if the list is only two long.
```suggestion
  stringr::str_flatten_comma(", and ")
```
